Greetings, m'lord.
Oh, hello. I'm waiting
for my mother.
She's taking me to the woods
since it's such a fine day.
[CECILY] Yes. So let's be off.
We've a ways to go.
The woods are dark.
I may get lost.
If I do, I hope that
you'll come find me.
Will you, Catesby?
[HASTINGS]
Catesby. I'll go on alone.
[YORKIST WOMAN A]
Fresh strawberry pies!
Surprise your loved ones with
something as sweet as them!
[CATESBY]
I've no reason to call on him.
[JANE] If Richard shall not
speak out against His Majesty's
whims, your only choice is to
rely on the queen dowager.
[HASTINGS]
But that would entail...
[JANE]
Come, Hastings.
Asking for a bit of
advice is not treason.
[CATESBY]
Don't tell me.
[NARRATOR] York of the white
rose, and Lancaster of the red.
These royal houses with
their flowered crests
have battled long and
hard for the throne.
Nowadays, the people
refer to their strife as
the "Wars of the Roses."
♪
[BUCKINGHAM]
The next council will decide
if you take the throne
at the coronation.
Everything hinges on that play.
[RICHARD]
And exactly how many allies
do you imagine
will side with us?
By my reckoning, it'll be
a fairly even split.
While the Earl of Northumberland
and Lord Howard are ours,
I can see Hastings and
Stanley being persuaded.
What about the Bishop of Ely?
John Morton is the type of
man who can be bought.
That's true.
I'll speak to him, then.
I suppose I should meet with
Howard and the others as well.
But what if Stanley and
Hastings won't join us?
When impassioned words slip
from those blessed fevered lips
of yours, there isn't a soul
alive who would refuse you.
If my "fevered lips" fail?
[BUCKINGHAM]
We'll need to kill them.
Because if we do not,
the next heads on the
chopping block will be ours.
Those are the rules to play by
when embarking on a
gamble against God.
[RICHARD] But what will
become of Hastings' retainer?
Should things go south.
Which one?
Catesby, of course.
The man's devotion
knows no bounds.
He's still human, though.
Will he look at me
with hate in his eyes?
[BUCKINGHAM] If he truly
cares for the royal family,
he'll understand. However...
If he becomes a briar
in our path to glory,
I'll brandish my sword
and cut him from it.
Look, Mother!
He finally made it!
[ELIZABETH] Did he?
I grew tired of waiting.
[ELIZABETH]
What a dolt that Hastings is!
[gasps]
[ELIZABETH]
Thank you for visiting, my lord.
It's much appreciated.
Um, it is my pleasure,
your Grace.
[ELIZABETH] I'm sorry, but I
don't intend to meddle
in politics anymore.
All I want... is to live a
peaceful life with my family.
If you remain in this convent,
I guarantee your
safety and that life.
But uh, I wish to ask
for some advice.
Oh? A revered noble wants
guidance from the likes of me?
To earnestly seek knowledge
from an old enemy
demonstrates how
virtuous your spirit is.
How dignified.
The realm would be
in excellent hands
if you were named Protector!
What? No, not I!
[ELIZABETH] Why not?
I would feel most at ease
entrusting my
Edward to your care.
[CATESBY] Should I report this
development to Lord Richard?
But if the Duke of Buckingham
were to learn of it as well...
--[galloping]
--[CATESBY gasps]
[BUCKINGHAM] Well, if it
isn't Lord Hastings.
Pray tell where you're headed.
An abbey's a rather
inappropriate place
for interludes with a lover,
or so I would think.
But this setting
would certainly suit
a meeting with the
queen dowager.
Worry not!
I can attest she's undergone
a change of heart.
You needn't fear her anymore.
[CATESBY] Lord Buckingham!
With all due respect,
there is something I'd
like to make known.
Every last action that
Lord Hastings takes
is done on behalf
of the royal family.
Make no mistake.
Should it become apparent
that I speak falsely,
I would ask you to punish me.
I see.
In that case, I wish to speak
with you in your master's stead.
Shall we?
[BUCKINGHAM]
Why did you shield Hastings?
Is it your desire to remain
an honest man until death?
Who is it you truly serve?
The one I serve, truly--
[BUCKINGHAM] Do you believe
you understand him
better than anyone else?
Kind gestures and compassion are
not what he presently seeks.
And since you can't
become a demon,
you're incapable of saving
Richard at this point.
[gasps]
[door opens]
[BUCKINGHAM] You met with
the Bishop of Ely, yes?
Were you able to buy him off?
Wait. Where'd this
mark come from?
It appears that the bishop
has acquired a taste
for corruption.
He wished not for gold,
but for my body.
[gasps] The bastard!
He defiled you!
I shall dig out his
damned intestines
and tear him to pieces!
[RICHARD] What is there
to be upset about?
It's not the most moral act,
but it won us the bishop.
Why does this anger
you so? Tell me.
Because of our oath.
I assure you
I haven't broken it.
I will not open this body
to anyone other than you.
[HASTINGS]
You saved me earlier, Catesby.
Thank you!
Never have I known a man
with more integrity than you.
[BUCKINGHAM]
Who is it you truly serve?
You're incapable of saving
Richard at this point.
[CATESBY]
Lord Richard.
[RICHARD]
Catesby?
May I speak with you,
Your Grace?
[RICHARD]
Now's not a good time.
[BUCKINGHAM] Let him in
if you wish. I don't mind.
It's in regard
to Lord Hastings.
Something I feel
you should know.
[RICHARD gasps]
[CATESBY]
Pardon the intrusion.
[door opens]
[BUCKINGHAM] This man.
If he becomes a briar...
[RICHARD] Catesby. If you mean
to turn your blade on me...
More and more often now,
he goes to Westminster,
so that he can meet the
queen dowager in secret.
And with each passing
encounter that they have,
their bond only grows.
What of you, Catesby?
What do you intend to
do about your master?
[CATESBY] If he shows
signs of treachery,
right then, I'll dispatch him.
You would dispatch
someone who stays loyal
to the House of York?
While I, on the other hand,
am about to betray the
blood of the royal family.
All in order to
obtain the crown.
From the moment that
you were born,
I have only served one lord.
It was you then,
and it is you now.
[RICHARD] I am a demon.
I'll pull you to hell.
You'll look on in pain,
amazed why you fell.
[BUCKINGHAM] From now on, see to
it that you take my orders
as though they are Richard's,
for we are two
halves of one whole.
Of course. It shall be done.
[BUCKINGHAM] Excellent news,
since I've already thought
of your first task.
Find that traitor and
lop his head off.
Consider his blood the seal
of your compact with us.
[RICHARD]
This warmth sears my flesh.
A sensation more vivid
than anything else.
Your Grace. Please, allow me...
[RICHARD] I shall take my
leave of you to go speak
with Lords Howard
and Northumberland
at today's tournament.
Though both noblemen are
strongly behind us now.
Will their support extend all
the way to you being king?
I simply need to make them
pledge it and forge a pact.
Ah! Good day, dear duke.
And to you,
My Lord Bishop. How goes?
[ELY]
I-I would speak to you.
If you would speak,
then I shall hear you speak.
Apologies, but it's
a private matter.
That's fine. You may proceed.
[ELY gasps] You see, in honor of
the widowed queen and her son,
King Edward the Fifth,
a religious service
is being arranged.
You're certain, Ely?
We have heard nothing of this.
Because it is to be
undisclosed to you.
'Twas formally signed
by the archbishop,
but I know in order
to request it of him,
the queen dowager worked
through Lord Hastings.
Uh, f-for now,
I'll take my leave.
Please visit to sample my
strawberries whenever you wish,
Lord Richard.
If we needed more proof
to dispose of Hastings,
I guess we have it.
But still, I did not foresee
Elizabeth being so bold.
This will be no average
church service.
Merely having it take
place will demonstrate
that the queen dowager
still wields great power.
And we can't even
try to prevent it,
or else we'd suffer
a fatal backlash
as enemies of the clergy
and the poor widow.
Here's a declaration of war.
This is God...
against the devil.
The devil has the devil's way.
I thought it wrong to
wish for warmth so grand,
but now it's here,
in the palm of my hand.
I shall take what I want,
and make my stand.
[ELIZABETH]
Lord Hastings.
Has the date of the service
been determined yet?
[HASTINGS] Actually, the service
has been canceled entirely.
[ELIZABETH gasps]
[HASTINGS] And not only that,
in its place there will be
a service for the
Duke of Gloucester.
[ELIZABETH] Impossible!
Who would give such a command?
It was decreed by the king.
[gasps] Richard must've
somehow found out
and goaded His Majesty!
Fie on that demon!
Frankly, given the position
that he holds now,
he might issue orders
without the king's command
or his knowledge.
Additionally, though it
pains me much
to be the one to inform you,
the king further demanded his
younger brother be handed over
to the Duke of Gloucester.
Queen Elizabeth.
[ELIZABETH laughs]
That foul creature
gives no quarter!
Well played, demon!
Does he intend to wrench
all hope from me
so that I plunge into despair?
But one who devotes
her life to revenge
does not fear such things.
The more he takes, the hotter
and brighter my soul burns!
Just you watch, Richard.
In due time, your hopes will
be the ones dashed... by me.
Mother, are you all right?
[ELIZABETH] Of course.
Why did I not realize it sooner?
There's a person who
knows Richard completely,
and despises him
more than anyone!
[HASTINGS]
Your Grace, Gloucester's actions
clearly overstep his
authority as Protector!
To carry out the service
for his sake in your palace!
He has been a bit high
handed lately, hasn't he?
Surely Ely agrees, don't you?
[ELY gasps]
Yes, you're entirely correct.
You've seen it, too?
His impudence and his
tyrannical behavior!
[HOWARD]
Desist immediately!
[HASTINGS]
Lord Howard.
'Tis cowardly to speak
thus in his absence!
The proceedings in which
The King delegated his power
to the Duke of Gloucester
were legitimate.
The impudent one is you!
Sophistry! Anyone with eyes can
see who's in the right here!
And it's the
intentioned mother--
[EDWARD V] Hastings!
Gathering for Mass is tiresome.
--But Your Majesty--!
--[EDWARD V] Leave us.
[YORKIST NOBLES chatter]
[HASTINGS]
I realized too late.
The palace is already full of
apples rotten to the core.
The few of us left must
strategize discreetly.
And I know just the place!
Blessings of the Lord be upon
you, guardians of the truth.
Our Bishop of Ely, Lord Stanley,
dear Lord Hastings.
We must band together
and take England back
from that lawless
fiend, Richard,
lest the royal family
be destroyed!
I know. Our situation has
grown more dire than before.
Formerly, Richard was
a straightforward,
reserved soldier.
He has a strange power,
one that allows him
to entice folks.
It's a-almost like magic!
I think I know of this spell,
it's the very potent power
of wealth and authority.
Quite right!
That's precisely it!
[ELIZABETH]
Everyone has weaknesses
they don't wish to be known.
If only we knew his.
Some scandal, for instance,
that would shake
people's faith in him.
[CECILY] I take it that's
why you called, Elizabeth?
What else could the reason be?
[ELIZABETH]
Mother!
I pray you'll forgive my abrupt
summons and previous rudeness.
There is a task God
has called us to do.
[CECILY] I have bewept a
worthy husband's death
and lived with looking
on his images,
but now two mirrors of
his princely semblance
are cracked in pieces
by malignant death.
All of the evil that
has befallen our family
was born from this womb.
A false glass that
only shows my shame.
Thus in exchange for helping
you, I have but one request.
I want you to ensure
that Richard dies.
[ALL gasp]
[CECILY]
I've tried many times myself,
but never went through with it.
Ahh, if only I could have
slain him with my words!
I would have shouted Richard's
secret to all of England
and let the world punish
him before it came to this!
[ELIZABETH]
What secret?
[CECILY] I concealed it from the
public because it could have
very well led to the downfall
of our house had it gotten out.
And in consequence, my cowardice
has allowed that demon
to sharpen its claws,
spread its wings, and flourish!
But now, I have no more
left that I can lose.
Nothing except for my
beloved Edward's children.
Yes, precisely! For the sake of
your son's darling children.
Tell us all the truth!
Tell us Richard's secret!
The truth is that Richard
Glouscester is demonic.
[inaudible]
[MAN A] He's an undigested
and deformed lump!
A blood-soaked demon who
defied the will of God!
This I prophesy!
One day, a host of grieving
widows, of childless parents,
of orphans whose futures
have been snuffed,
they will lament the
needless deaths he caused!
[YORKIST MAN A]
What did he say?
[YORKIST WOMAN B]
Lord Richard is a demon?
This should be enough to
let us strike Gloucester
with a most fatal blow.
Though I personally find these
claims quite hard to believe.
I don't.
Looking back on it, Richard's
peculiar way of acting
make sense with what
Lady Cecily says.
We shall indict him at
the next council meeting.
And expose his true demonic
nature to the light of day!
[MAN B]
Why was he ever born?
Curse the day of that
monster's birth!
Curse it to hell!
[MAN B] Curse the demon!
The demon, Richard Plantagenet!
Such a dreadful racket.
I guess Hastings would like to
see you burned at the stake
come next council.
Is that your idea
of informing, witch?
You realize it's much too
late to beg for your life.
I've known the duke's
secret a while now
and have yet to
tell a single soul.
The thing I don't know, however.
Do you truly
understand yourself?
Have you felt at all unusual?
If it's medicine
you require, Grace,
don't hesitate to
ask for anything.
The kind that sapped
the king of his will?
An abortifacient.
Do be careful. It causes
inflammation in the sunlight.
The council will have
something displayed,
but t'won't be a demon.
T'will be his head.
[STANLEY] Where is the
rest of the council?
[BUCKINGHAM]
Oh.
I suppose we must have
arrived a little early.
Even the Duke of Gloucester
isn't here yet.
Can't you stand in?
I believe you could serve
as a proxy for him.
After all, you should
soonest know his mind.
We're friends, yes.
We know each other's faces,
but for our hearts,
he knows no more of mine
than I of yours, or I of his,
my lord, than you of mine.
[RICHARD]
Pardon my tardiness, my lords.
Now. What shall we discuss?
The coronation.
We need a date.
[RICHARD]
By the way, My Lord of Ely.
Was that not an intimate time
we spent in your chambers
the other day? Just us two.
[gasps]
You promised to gift me
strawberries from your garden
and I saw plenty of good
ones growing there.
I do beseech you,
send for some of them.
[gasps]
Right now?
Yes, now. Go.
[ELY]
M-Marry and will.
So what date shall we set?
I think the others
are much too late.
Forgive me, Gloucester.
Will you excuse me, too?
I would like to step
out for a moment.
Go ahead.
Lord Hastings. The others
shall not be coming here.
They are presently gathered
at another meeting place.
Damn it!
So Gloucester did manage
to buy all of them off!
Catesby!
Bring nobles, post haste!
They can observe the charges!
Gather as many
witnesses as you can!
Then you're in luck.
They're already here.
Incredible.
Your talents never cease.
I dare say you're the
most capable man alive!
I'm certain your
feelings are mixed.
Taking out Gloucester, both a
former master and friend.
I feel fine. I had one
wish for Lord Richard.
I prayed he'd be able to
walk in the warmth of light.
It should be you.
Perform your lord's last rites.
End his misery.
[door slams]
Hear me, Gloucester!
For I shall tell you the true
purpose of this council!
Listen well!
Richard Plantagenet schemes
to overthrow our great kingdom!
She could've kept it secret
for her honor's sake, but--!
Lady Cecily revealed the truth
for the future of England!
In his flesh, the duke harbors
a demon from the depths of hell!
[YORKIST SOLDIERS chatter]
Show us all! Show us proof
contrary to this claim
and verify your
innocence before us!
So a cursed demon, am I?
And who was it that cursed me?
[ELY, HASTINGS gasp]
My body changed.
Through some despicable magic,
my form warped into the
ghastly thing it is now.
So who is the actual fiend here?
Is it not the one
who cast this curse?
Well, Hastings?
You and all who threw
in their lot in with you
are the true demons
infesting this court!
[grunts]
You speak utter lies!
[RICHARD]
Then behold.
[YORKIST SOLDIERS gasp]
Here's your proof that I
was not born this way.
It's the result of a curse
you had your witch cast.
Put these rebels to death!
[HASTINGS]
Now I'm certain of everything,
even without a
shred of evidence!
You are all godless fools
seeking the empty favor
of a demon!
Catesby! Seize Richard
this instant!
[CATESBY] That day, he needed
me, but I could not save him.
[CATESBY]
Lord Richard! Lord Richard!
[CATESBY] Oh, no.
What if Lord Richard is..?
[CATESBY]
Your Grace.
I know full well I can
never become the light
that illumines your path.
Even so...
To me, you are life itself.
I won't abandon you.
Lord Hastings. Ready yourself.
Even you side
with Richard? Disgusting!
I'll have this crown of mine
cut from my shoulders before
I see it so foul misplaced.
[CATESBY] I will never
abandon you, my lord.
In the pitch-black darkness,
I will be your sword.
♪